Pursuing peace can be a challenge.
Because of our imperfections
and the complexities of life,
we have to work for peace,
even under normal conditions.
But pursuing peace
becomes a greater challenge
when it’s one-sided.
Difficulties arise in the family
and in the congregation
when one person pursues peace
but the other does not.
For example, in the congregation,
perhaps we have a friend
who has a problem with another friend
in the congregation
but does not do anything
to reconcile the situation,
or in the family, a Christian mate
may have difficulty pursuing peace
if his or her spouse
does not apply Bible principles.
Well, what do we do then?
Well, in those situations,
the Bible account of Abigail may be helpful.
I invite you to turn in your Bibles
to 1 Samuel chapter 25,
and here we’re introduced to Abigail
and her husband, Nabal.
And you notice here in verse 3,
Nabal is described as “harsh.”
In verse 25,
Abigail describes him as ‘senseless.’
In verse 17, his own worker
describes him as “worthless”
and says “no one can speak [with] him.”
Well, with a personality like that,
it’s not surprising
that he mistreats David’s young men.
And now David wants revenge.
How do you pursue peace
in a situation like that?
Well, what does Abigail do?
Well, think about it.
What she could have done.
See, Abigail could have done nothing.
It’s not hard to imagine that she had
a difficult life as well
living with this man.
She could have just stepped back
and let David come through
and do what he had in mind.
Or she could have gone out to David
and inflamed the situation,
maybe describing what a terrible man he is
and how he mistreats her as well.
See, either of these approaches
could have made her life easier,
but she didn’t do that.
Now, Abigail could not change
her husband’s ways,
but she did what she could
to defuse an escalating conflict.
In fact, notice her respectful,
well-chosen words.
Let’s go back to 1 Samuel 25,
and let’s read verses 27-31:
“Now let this gift that your servant girl
has brought to my lord
“be given to the young men
who are following my lord.
“Pardon, please, the transgression
of your servant girl,
“for Jehovah will without fail make
for my lord a lasting house,
“because my lord
is fighting the wars of Jehovah,
“and no evil has been found
in you all your days.
“When someone rises up to pursue you
and seeks your life,
“the life of my lord will be wrapped securely
“in the bag of life with Jehovah your God,
“but the lives of your enemies
“he will hurl away like stones from a sling.
“And when Jehovah has done for my lord
all the good things he has promised
“and he appoints you as leader over Israel,
“you will have no remorse
or regret in your heart
“for shedding blood without cause
“and for letting the hand
of my lord take revenge.
“When Jehovah confers good upon my lord,
remember your servant girl.”
Do you notice what Abigail does?
She comes in with a gift,
she bows down to David,
she takes the blame
for the situation herself,
and she reasons with him
using godly principles.
Abigail’s actions calm David
and avert a calamity.
She pursued peace.
But to do that, she had to look
beyond her own feelings
and consider what was best
for Jehovah’s name.
And that is not always easy to do.
But what was the result?
Because she sowed peace—she pursued peace—
she reaped peace.
How can we benefit from Abigail’s example?
Why is it important to do so now?
Let’s look at the following dramatization.
And later on,
when things got even more intense,
that’s when our peace
was really put to the test.
Yeah, but, Tim, you always
found a way to keep us positive.
Well, I learned a lot about that
from my better half.
Amy has always had a way
of bringing people together.
For example, just before the pandemic,
there were these two pioneer sisters
in our congregation.
Becky was energetic, industrious,
and fearless in her ministry,
and Lena was experienced, self-sacrificing,
and such a good Bible teacher.
But they didn’t exactly get along.
Are you ready to go?
Are you OK?
It’s just— It’s Becky.
She’s just such a phantom pioneer.
We never see her.
I’m sorry, but she just needs
to be more serious
about her ministry.
Well, she’s been doing
metro witnessing and . . .
I know, I know, and LDC too, right?
She does plumbing?
Concrete.
She does have a lot of energy!
Do you remember
when we used to be like that?
I don’t know that I was ever like Becky.
No, you weren’t.
You were Beckyer than Becky.
I couldn’t keep up with you
—those long service days
in your little red car.
That feels like a long time ago.
Yeah.
You know, Becky reminds me a lot of you
—I mean both of us—
twenty years ago.
She’s working so hard,
and she’s made
so many sacrifices
for the truth,
just like you have.
I think we should get together
—the three of us.
You should get to know her better.
The next week,
I had them both over to the house.
And the more those two
got to know each other,
the closer they became.
You know that proverb:
“The tongue of the wise is a healing”?
Amy taught me what that verse really means.
OK, everyone out!
When everything changed
and we suddenly
found ourselves locked up together,
I tried to show that same spirit
so that we could stay united.
And with Jehovah’s help,
we did.
Now, did you notice what our sister did
and did not do?
She could have done nothing.
She could have let Lena, her service partner,
cultivate those thoughts about Becky.
Or Amy could have poured fuel
on the situation,
maybe agreeing with Lena
or telling a few stories
about how Becky annoyed her as well.
But she did not do that.
See, Amy’s desire to sow peace
moved her to help Lena
see things from a different perspective.
And as a result, the congregation benefited
and reaped peace.
Notice how the apostle Paul explains
this approach that we should take
if you turn in your Bibles
to Romans 12:18
—Romans 12:18:
“If possible, as far as it depends on you,
be peaceable with all men.”
“As far as it depends on you”
—see, our congregations
and our families benefit
when we sow seeds of peace
before matters get out of hand.
It’s like seeing a small fire in our house.
What do we do?
Do we just ignore it—hope it goes away?
Do we fan the flames?
Do we put fuel on it?
No, we do something.
Why?
Because we know that if left unchecked,
that fire could destroy our home.
Well, it’s similar when we see problems
that develop
and peace being disrupted.
We do the same.
Why?
Because we know that if we don’t
do something and if it’s left unchecked,
that disturbance could destroy our family
and the congregation.
So the question is,
How do we sow seeds of peace?
Well, Abigail was a good example.
Did you notice what she did?
She considered how best
to approach the situation.
She was proactive.
She didn’t just hope
it would go away on its own.
She used respectful, soothing speech.
She was careful not to fan the flames
or add fuel to it
—all good steps we can take.
And we have other resources
to help us as well.
We can do research in the Bible
and in our publications
to see how others have sowed peace
in similar situations,
and we can also consult with the elders.
Now, we understand that this
is especially a challenge
if the situation is in the family,
as it was for Abigail.
That is not easy at all.
And in those situations,
try to focus on your mate’s good qualities,
not on his or her irritating traits.
But with all of this,
we have to be realistic.
Remember what the apostle Paul said there
as recorded in verse 18.
He said “if possible,
as far as it depends on you.”
So Paul is acknowledging
that peace with others
may not always be possible.
So, what do we do?
We have to do the best that we can,
and then we leave the rest
in Jehovah’s hands.
So may we be determined
to develop the practice
of pursuing peace now.
Whether we’re in the congregation
or in the family,
we can be confident that if we sow peace,
we will reap peace,
even if others don’t respond.
How?
Well, we’ll have peace with Jehovah,
peace with ourselves,
and the knowledge
that we did the right thing.
Additionally, when in the future
a force for peace is vitally needed,
we will be prepared to provide it.
Brother William Malenfant,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now consider
the next talk of this symposium,
“How They Sowed and Reaped Peace
—Mephibosheth.”